---
layout: portfolio
title:  News Monitoring
categories: portfolio
image: images/projects/discover/square.png

tagline: Windows Phone 8 app for tracking habits, developed as part of my thesis project

shortdesc: The Habit Tracker app is a Windows Phone 8 app that helps the users to track and establish daily habits. It was part of my master thesis and was used to evaluate emotional design as a way to improve the user experience.

context: Master Thesis project, semester 4 of Interaction Design & Methodologies Master
duration: 20 weeks

used_skills: Windows Phone development (XAML, C#, Blend), Adobe Illustrator, User Interviews, Emotional Design
division_of_work: This thesis project was executed by me with consultancy of my supervisors at the university and Microsoft.
---

 image fullwidth projects/habittracker/long.gif  

The Habit Tracker app lets users create daily habits like exercising or reading. If the habit was successfuly pursued on that day, it will be checked off in the calendar. Consecutive days count as a chain and will motivate users to keep the habit going.

 image_folder path: images/projects/habittracker/gal  

The topic of my thesis was the exploration of emotional design for mobile apps and finding guidelines on how to use emotional design to improve the user experience. A collection of positive emotions were collected and app aspects were designed specifically to evoke certain emotions in users.

The Habit Tracker app was developed to evaluate emotional designs. Therefore, a minimal valuable version and a version with several emotional design enhancements were developed and delivered to testers. Later, the test user were interviewed about the impact of the version differences on their usage and perception of the app.

##Design Process

* I __interviewed__ users about their favorite apps, enjoyable app features/designs/aspects, perceived emotions. This was supported with simple selfmade emotion cards. Those helped the user to select and talk about emotions.
* A minimal valuable product (MVP) was __sketched__ that provides the basic functionality for the app concept.
* Two __design workshops__ were held with design students to get a more diverse set of ideas on how to design for emotions.
* Quick __sketches__ of workshop ideas were created.
* The MVP was __implemented__ and delivered to test users a Windows Store closed beta release.
* The enhanced version was __implemented__ as an update for the MVP.
* __Hallway usability tesing__ was done to find and fix rough usability issues.
* Test users were __interviewed__ about their experience after two weeks of testing.

 image_folder path: images/projects/habittracker/process  

##Project Takeaways

* Targeting specific emotions can help to make an app more meaningful to the user and provide additional motivation to use it.
* Emotional design can only work if basic requirements on usability and user satisfaction are met first.
* Interviews revealed that there were some usability issues in the final prototype. Another iteration would have improved the user experience and enabled some of the emotional design aspects to strengthen their impact.